Hello friends
In this video let us learn how to reverse a
linked list.
We have given a linked list with its head pointer
Our task is to reverse the given linked list by
changing the links between each node
Let us take this linked list with three nodes with 10
as the head and our task is to reverse
this linked list.
And at the end, the expected linked list is like this.
The last node 30 will be the head
So how to do that? Now let us reverse it step by step
So let us declare two variables first is current which references
the head node
So set current as head second is prev to reverse
the linked list. In the reverse linked list
first node's
next should be null. So set prev equal to null
In the expected linked list
10-next will be equal to null. So let us set
current-next equal to prev. So 10-next becomes null. But we
missed the link between 10 and 20. So we can't
do any further operations as we lost the link between
10 and 20.
So before changing the link, we need to back up
the next node's address.
So let us use another variable next to back up the
next node's address before changing the link
The first take back up of next node in the
next variable.
So next equal to current next and then change the
link to reverse the link list so current next equal
to prev
Now we have modified the links of one node.
That is the first node. It is now
as we expected. We need to do the same
process to all other nodes to reverse the entire linked list.
For second node
previous node would be the first node that is 10
So make the previous point a point to current node
that is 10.
So write prev is equal to current
And we need to change the link of node 20
so that will become the current node
So make the current node point to the next node
that is current equal to next. Do the same process
till current node is not equal to null
So put this code inside a while loop until
current node not equal to null. In the next iteration, condition
is okay. So 20 should point to 10. That is next
of 20 should be node 10.
But if we change the link now itself,
we will lose the node 30
So back up the next node and change the link.
So write current next equal to prev. So 20 now
points to 10.
So first node and second node is okay now.
Now move prev to current and current to next
Now in the next iteration, condition is okay.
Here to back up the next node, move next to current next
which is null here.
Next 30 should point to its previous node 20.
So write current next equal to prev. So 30 now points to 20.
Now move prev to current and current to next.
Now we have changed the links of all the nodes
So in next iteration, while we check the condition it fails
Now the node 30 should be the head node
And how can we set 30 as the head?
Currently, which variable is pointing to 30? It is prev.
So while reversing a linked list after reversal the last
node will be pointed by prev. So make head equal
to prev and it is done.
We got our expected reverse linked list from the head the nodes are 30 20 10 null.